I 



isWv^_ ^^^p^ffewre 





Salute to Independence 




His Highness Seyyid 
Jamshid bin Abdulla, 
proclaimed eleventh 
Sultan of Zanzibar, 
2nd July, 1963. 
Front Cover: Waterfront, 
Zanzibar. 




ZANZIBAR 
SLAND 



Zanzibar (which consists of the two islands — Zanzibar and Pemba) owes its importance to its 
position on one of the world's great sea routes. It was known at a time when the rest of Africa 
was still a mystery, indeed it was one of the springboards from which the interior was explored. 
From the 7th century B.C. Arab dhows have come to this coast on the north-east monsoon and 
returned on the south-west. Ships came, too, from India and China for gold and ivory. 

Europe entered the history of Zanzibar when Vasco da Gama visited it in 1498 on his way 
from Portugal to India. For the next two hundred years the Arabs and Portuguese struggled for 
domination of the East African coast and islands until in 1698 the Arabs of Oman ousted the 
Portuguese from Mombasa, and Zanzibar and Pemba fell to them. Since then the two islands 
have had Arab rulers and since 1 822 have been united under a single sultan. 

In 1 828 Seyyid Said, Sultan of Muscat and Oman, decided to transfer his capital to Zanzibar 
Town, and made it the principal city in East Africa. J Play the flute in Zanzibar and all Africa as far 
as the lakes dances/ ran the proverb. 

The British connection with Zanzibar began with efforts to put down the slave trade that was 
then ravaging East Africa. Sultan Seyyid Said entered into agreements restricting the traffic. 
Seyyid Majid bin Said, his successor, was a firm friend of Britain, and Britain recognised the 
independence of Zanzibar from Oman in 1862. In 1873, his brother, Sultan Seyyid Barghash bin 



LIBRARY 
UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS 






"^ 




PEMBA ISLAND 



People of Zanzibar. 



W J 



Said, agreed to close all the slave markets, and the British Consul, Sir John Kirk, became Grand 
Vizier in all but name. In 1890 Sultan Seyyid Ali bin Said placed the country under British 
protection. The Protectorate was proclaimed on 4th November. 

Zanzibar has had Executive and Legislative Councils since 1 926 but it is since 1 957, when 
elections were first held, that constitutional progress has been rapid. Under the 1961 constitu- 
tion the country achieved an elected majority in the legislature and a ministerial system. 

The political parties in Zanzibar are the Zanzibar Nationalist Party (Z.N. P.), the Zanzibar and 
Pemba People's Party (Z.P.P.P.) and the Afro-Shirazi Party (A.S.P.). The elections held in 
January 1961 ended in deadlock so fresh elections were held in June. Following this, a 
coalition of the Z.N. P. and Z.P.P.P. took office. 

A constitutional conference was held in London in March 1962. A constitution for self- 
government along the lines agreed at this conference, and including provision for a Bill of 
Rights, was introduced in June 1 963 when the islands of Zanzibar and Pemba became internally 
self-governing, prior to obtaining full sovereignty. 

Two weeks later, Zanzibar went to the polls again, this time under universal adult suffrage. 

The Z.N. P. and Z.P.P.P. coalition remained in office and Shaikh Muhammad Shamte Hamadi is 

the Prime Minister under whom the country is now moving forward into independence. 

1000549 



About the Islands 



Area : Zanzibar 640 square miles. 
Pemba 380 square miles. 
C I i mate : Tropical but the heat tempered by sea breezes. 
Population : 316,000 comprising Africans, Arabs and Asians. 

Zanzibar Town has some 58,000 inhabitants. 
Languages : Kiswahill, Arabic, Gujarat! and English. 



Beach scene. Bathing is good from all beaches, especially at high tide. 




n the narrow streets of Zanzibar Town. 



Zanzibar has been described as 'a small 
green island that smells of cloves'. It is 
in fact a coral island, the largest off East 
Africa, 54 miles long and 24 miles across 
at its widest separated from the main- 
land by a 22^-mile-channel. Pemba, El 
Huthera, the Green One in Arabic, is 
somewhat smaller and lies 25 miles to 
the north-east of Zanzibar. 

Both islands are low-lying. Although 
Pemba is more hilly, its highest point is 
only 390 feet above sea level. The west 
sides of the islands are full of bays and 
inlets. Zanzibar, the capital with a popu- 
lation of some 58,000, is on the west of 
that island. The east coasts have long 
stretches of sand and palm trees facing 
the Indian Ocean, but over much of the 
islands vegetation is luxuriant; besides 
the coconut palms are the dark mango 
trees, the shiny clove plantations, and 
masses of brilliant shrubs. In fact what 
impresses the traveller is the great variety 
of agricultural conditions over such a 
small area. Sailors have said for genera- 
tions that the clear, cool springs of the 
islands give the sweetest water in Africa. 



A coppersmith's stall. 





- 







An Arab farmer. 



(Right) Weekly weighing 
of calves at Kizimbani 
Agricultural Research 
Station. The cattle 
population of Pemba 
(almost self-supporting in 
meat) is 32,000, while 
that of Zanzibar is 15,000. 
The Agricultural Depart- 
ment aims to improve 
meat and milk supplies. 

(Far right) Spraying 
young lime trees at 
Kizimbani. To encourage 
lime growing, budded 
seedlings are provided by 
the Government. The 
Clove Growers' Associa- 
tion makes lime juice for 
the East African mainland 
and Rhodesia; lime oil 
goes to London. 



Harvest by 
Land and Sea 



Zanzibar's domestic exports in 1962: £3,181,000. 
Zanzibar's imports in 1962: £5,286,000. 



21% of these came 

from the U.K. 

34% from other 

Commonwealth 

countries. 

45% from foreign 

countries. 





(Above, left) The Fisheries 
Officer outside his office. 
In Zanzibar the fishermen are 
mostly farmers as wel 
Government loans help them 
buy powered boats and nylon nets. 
A new refrigeration plant 
has enabled an export trade in 
frozen shellfish and octopus to open. 
Crawfish tails are exported 
as far as America by air. 
(Above) Cutting cocoa pods on 
the Matangatwani Agricultural 
Station, Pemba. 



Cloves account for three-quarters of 
Zanzibar's export income, with coconut 
products making up much of the rest. 
The Government has long been aware of 
the dangers of such concentration and 
encourages farmers to grow alternative 
crops. For instance, Government help 
has meant that the exports of chillies 
rose from 33 J tons in 1959 to 132 tons 
in 1 962. Coffee, now grown for local use 
might also be an export crop one day. 
The principal foods cultivated by farmers 
for home use are rice and cassava. 



Cloves . . . 



There are 4,000,000 clove trees on the islands. 

Four-fifths of these are in Pemba. 

753,000 cwt. of cloves were marketed in 1962 for £2,080,000 

268,000 lbs. of clove bud and stem oil for £98,000 

supplying 75% per cent of the world's need. 



Clove oil distillery. 

The Clove Growers' 

Association 

buys the clove 

stems from the farmers 

to make oil. 



The cloves dry on mats 
for four or five days — 
wrong timing here 
makes them unmarketable. 






Pink clove buds grow in 
clusters of from 10 to 50 
heads. They are picked 
unopened. 

(Photograph: 

National Geographic Society.) 



Cloves have an ancient and honourable 
history. Two centuries B.C. the Chinese 
were using them to perfume their breath 
in the presence of their Emperor. 
Throughout the Middle Ages Europeans 
were using them to improve a monoton- 
ous diet — and cooks still appreciate 
them. Today in some parts of the world, 
the most popular cigarettes are those 
with cloves mixed in the tobacco. Dis- 
tillate of cloves is added to some popular 
cosmetics. Clove oil (and dried Zanzibar 
cloves yield anything from 15 to 18 per 
cent oil), is used to make vanillin, for 
flavouring, perfumes and medicinal use. 



It was Seyyid Said bin Sultan who, 
convinced that it was a good crop for the 
islands, decreed that every landholder 
should plant three clove seedlings for 
every coconuttreeowned, on pain of for- 
feiture of the land. In 1872 a hurricane 
destroyed two-thirds of the trees; but 
clove trees are very long-lived, so that 
those planted after the disaster are still 
producing. Since 1 928 the Clove Grow- 
ers' Association has looked after the 
marketing of cloves, helped stabilize the 
price and distilled the oil. Indonesia and 
India are among the chief customers, 
taking over 60 per cent of exports. 



Women hand-pick the 
export cloves. They must 
be uniform in size. 




(Below) Domestic 
Science at a Pemba Girls 
School. (Right) New 
buildings at Seyyida 
Maatuka Girls' School. 

(Bottom) Wete Boys' 
Primary School, Pemba, 
built with CD. and 
W. funds. 




Tomorrow's 
Citizens 



The Government provides 



Aids a further: 



63 Primary Schools 

3 Secondary Schools 

2 Teacher-training Colleges. 

10 Primary Schools 

2 Secondary Schools. 




Ill The Muslim Academy, 
Zanzibar Town, offers 
secondary courses in 
Arabic and Islamic studies. 



King George VI 

Secondary School. 

New buildings 

came from King George VI 

Memorial Fund. 




The last ten years have seen a great out- 
burst of activity in the field of education. 
Expenditure has trebled and is today 
some 14 per cent of the Government's 
total budget. Enrolment at primary 
schools has more than doubled and now 
there are some 22,000 pupils— a 22 per 
cent increase over the 1 958 figures. 
Government primary schools are free, 
except in the two top classes and open to 
children of all races and creeds. The 
course lasts for eight years. Most Gov- 
ernment schools teach in Swahili ; some 



grant-aided schools for Asians use 
Gujarati. English is used in the higher 
forms of primary schools and in ail 
secondary schools. 

Enrolment at the five Government and 
grant-aided secondary schools, with 
that of the two private schools in the 
territory, came to 1,483 in 1962. Each 
school takes a four-year course leading 
to the Cambridge University Overseas 
School Certificate. Pupils at the King 
George VI School take the Cambridge 
Higher School Certificate. Atthe Ka-rimjee 



Trade School some 50 trainees follow 
a building course. 

Students who have completed their 
secondary course can go on either to the 
men's or women's teacher-training col- 
lege, for a two-year course, during which 
they have a Government allowance for 
pocket money. Both these colleges run 
refresher courses for qualified teachers. 

Over 300 pupils go overseas annually 
for further education (in 1 962, 246 were 
in Britain). About 70 hold Zanzibar Gov- 
ernment Scholarships for study abroad. 



Old fort into playground. 
Kindergarten children play 
in the Portuguese 
fortifications. 



From the dawn of civilisation until now — the Arab dhow. 




(Left) One of 
Zanzibar's glories, a 
carved brass-studded 
door. The motifs are 
believed to be pre-lslamic. 



Visiting Zanzibar 



'This piace for the goodness of the har borough and watering and plentiful 
refreshing with fish f and for sending sorts of fruits of the countrey . . . is 
carefully to be sought for by such of all ships as shall hereafter pass that way/ 



CAPTAIN OF THE 'EDWARD BONADVENTURE', 
FIRST BRITISH SHIP TO DROP ANCHOR IN ZANZIBAR HARBOUR, 1592. 



But today these former agents of Zanzibar's prosperity are decreasing. The 1925 Peace Memorial Museum. 




Zanzibar has great attractions for the 
visitor: the sandy beaches under the 
shade of palm trees, the warm sea, the 
masses of flowering shrubs and trees, 
the perfume of cloves, the Arab style of 
Zanzibar town with its narrow streets 
and tall plain white-washed houses em- 
bellished with magnificently carved 
wooden doors, its markets with silver- 
smiths and ivory carvers at work and the 
harbour where the richly ornamented 
dhows from Arabia and the Persian Gulf 
lie at anchor. 

Two shipping lines call regularly at 
Zanzibar and scheduled air services op- 
erate between Zanzibar, Kenya and 
Tanganyika, and Zanzibar and Pemba. 



1000549 



/ 

Progress 



IN ROAD-MAKING 

New road on Pemba to help the clove- 
growers. Of the island's 227 miles of 
roads, 81 have bitumen surfaces. Of 
Zanzibar's 387 miles of road, 276 are 
bituminized. In the capital itself the 
bazaar streets are paved with precast 
concrete slabs to assist the iron-wheeled 
hand carts used there. Besides these 
streets, 13 miles of roads have special 
water-proofing. 



IN SKILLS 



(Bottom) A schoolboy at work on a tex- 
tile design which will be printed at the 
school. Students of special talent may 
continue their studies at Makerere 
College, Uganda. 

(Top) Zanzibar Broadcasting Service, 
who have a station on Pemba, interview 
one of the Island's welfare officers. She 
is Miss Zuwena Abdulla Zaharan, who 
trained at Leicester University. 




IN HEALTH 



Zanzibar has a wide range of medical 
services. (Top left) Miss E, Harrison from 
New Zealand, Sister Tutor attheHassan- 
ali Karimjee Jivanjee Hospital, gives a 
demonstration to a class of students. 
This hospital's new out-patient depart- 
ment, completed in 1959, has its own 
operating theatre, dispensary, pathology 
department and dental unit. 
The fight against tuberculosis is an im- 



portant aspect of medical work. (Top 
right) A hospital assistant examines a 
small boy for T.B. at the Kisimkazi dis- 
pensary. Put up in 1 962, it is the newest 
of the dispensaries built by CD. and W. 
funds. (Bottom) A ward in the Zenub- 
bai Karimjee T.B. Hospital. It is at Dole, 
highest point of Zanzibar Island. There 
are leprosy hospitals at Walezo, Zanzibar, 
and Makondeni, Pemba. 




Ar ± ^ ~ ; 




n 

3 

i 

i 



Coconuts — Zanzibar's 
second product. 
Ripe nuts, oil, coir fibre, 
copra are important exports. 
(Left) Coconut husks 
make coir fibre. 
(Right) Preparing copra 
from dried nut Kernel. 
(Below) A typical village 
with neat houses and 
coconut palm backdrop. 



Prepared for British Information Services by the 
Central Office of Information, 1963. 



Printed in England for H.M. Stationery Office by 
Trade Union Labor by Forcpress 51-8977. 



British Information Services. 

Distributed by British Information Services, an Agency of 
the British Government, 845 Third Avenue at 51st St., 
New York 22, N.Y. This material is filed with the Depart- 
ment of Justice, where the required registration state- 
ment of B.I.S. under 56 Stat. 248-258 as an Agency of 
the British Government is available for inspection. 
Registration does not imply approval of this material by 
the United States Government. 




